Vectorization is a
very important concept
in scientific computing
because it can actually
unlock some
available performance
that you might not be aware of.
So what is it?
Well, consider three arrays.
They are just
one-dimensional arrays
that have the same length.
And we initialize
a and b somehow.
This doesn't matter how.
And then we have a do loop.
In that do loop, we
compute each element
of c based on the corresponding
elements of a and b.
In this case, we just sum
the two elements in a and b
and store that in the
corresponding element
in c, very simple.
And of course, this
happens step by step.
So first for a(1) and
b(1), then a(2), b(2), et
cetera, et cetera, up
to the end of the array.
Nothing particularly
exciting here,
except that under the hood,
there are other options.
And that's because in
your CPU, in each core,
there are registers.
And those registers
have a certain length.
Typically, this is 256 bits
for the AVX2 instruction
set of machine code.
Those are floating
point registers.
So they can be used to store
floating point numbers.
But a double precision
floating point number only
takes 64 bits.
So that means that, in fact, we
can store four of those numbers
into a single register.
And suppose that those
would be the floating point
numbers representing four
elements of our array a,
we can store the corresponding
four elements of array b
in another register.
And now the special
instructions that
actually allow us to do an
addition on those registers--
meaning, that these four double
precision floating point values
will be added and
stored potentially
in another register.
That would be the
vaddpd instruction,
and the same for
multiplication, vmulpd,
and even a fused
multiply add instruction,
the vfmadd123pd instruction.
And there are several
others of those.
So actually, they allow you to
operate on multiple floating
point values at once and
compute them in a single step--
not entirely true,
but good enough.
So basically, that means
that since double precision
numbers are 64 bits, we can
operate on four of those
simultaneously.
Or if we're doing single
precision computations,
then we can operate on
eight values simultaneously.
And this is illustrated here.
In more recent CPUs, the AVX-512
instruction set is implemented.
They actually have 512-bit
floating point registers,
which means that you
can operate concurrently
on eight double
precision floating point
values or 16 single precision
floating point values.
And that, of course,
can potentially
increase the performance of
your applications significantly.
And what happens in practise
is basically that you can view
this as a kind of sliding window
over four double precision
values.
And it simply moves in steps
of four values each time.